Symptoms of ACS depend somewhat on the extent and location of obstruction and are quite variable.
Except when infarction is massive, recognizing the amount of ischemia by symptoms alone is difficult.
After the acute event, many complications can occur. They usually involve electrical dysfunction (eg,
conduction defects, arrhythmias), myocardial dysfunction (eg, heart failure, interventricular septum or free
wall rupture, ventricular aneurysm, pseudoaneurysm, mural thrombus formation, cardiogenic shock), or
valvular dysfunction (typically mitral regurgitation). Electrical dysfunction can be significant in any form of
ACS, but usually, large parts of myocardium must be ischemic to cause significant myocardial dysfunction.
Other complications of ACS include recurrent ischemia and pericarditis. Pericarditis that occurs 2 to 10 wk
after an MI is known as post-MI syndrome or Dressler's syndrome.

Unstable angina: Symptoms are those of angina pectoris (see p. 2090), except that the pain or
discomfort of unstable angina usually is more intense, lasts longer, is precipitated by less exertion, occurs
spontaneously at rest (as angina decubitus), is progressive (crescendo) in nature, or involves any
combination of these features.
NSTEMI and STEMI: Symptoms of NSTEMI and STEMI are the same. Days to weeks before the event,
about two thirds of patients experience prodromal symptoms, including unstable or crescendo angina,
shortness of breath, and fatigue. Usually, the first symptom of infarction is deep, substernal, visceral pain
described as aching or pressure, often radiating to the back, jaw, left arm, right arm, shoulders, or all of
these areas. The pain is similar to angina pectoris but is usually more severe and long-lasting; more often
accompanied by dyspnea, diaphoresis, nausea, and vomiting; and relieved little or only temporarily by
rest or nitroglycerin. However, discomfort may be mild; about 20% of acute MIs are silent (ie,
asymptomatic or causing vague symptoms not recognized as illness by the patient), more commonly in
diabetics. Some patients present with syncope. Patients often interpret their discomfort as indigestion,
particularly because spontaneous relief may be falsely attributed to belching or antacid consumption. Women are more likely to present with atypical chest discomfort. Elderly patients may report dyspnea
more than ischemic-type chest pain. In severe ischemic episodes, the patient often has significant pain
and feels restless and apprehensive. Nausea and vomiting may occur, especially with inferior MI.
Dyspnea and weakness due to LV failure, pulmonary edema, shock, or significant arrhythmia may
dominate.
Skin may be pale, cool, and diaphoretic. Peripheral or central cyanosis may be present. Pulse may be
thready, and BP is variable, although many patients initially have some degree of hypertension during
pain.
Heart sounds are usually somewhat distant; a 4th heart sound is almost universally present. Asoft
systolic blowing apical murmur (reflecting papillary muscle dysfunction) may occur. During initial
examination, a friction rub or more striking murmurs suggest a preexisting heart disorder or another
diagnosis. Detection of a friction rub within a few hours after onset of MI symptoms suggests acute
pericarditis rather than MI. However, friction rubs, usually evanescent, are common on days 2 and 3 postSTEMI. The chest wall is tender when palpated in about 15% of patients.
In RV infarction, signs include elevated RV filling pressure, distended jugular veins.
