Angina may be a vague, barely troublesome ache or may rapidly become a severe, intense precordial
crushing sensation. It is rarely described as pain. Discomfort is most commonly felt beneath the sternum,
although location varies. Discomfort may radiate to the left shoulder and down the inside of the left arm,
even to the fingers; straight through to the back; into the throat, jaws, and teeth; and, occasionally, down
the inside of the right arm. It may also be felt in the upper abdomen. The discomfort of angina is never
above the ears or below the umbilicus.
Some patients have atypical angina (eg, bloating, gas, abdominal distress), often ascribing symptoms to
indigestion; belching may even seem to relieve the symptoms. Others have dyspnea due to the sharp,
reversible increase in LV filling pressure that often accompanies ischemia. Frequently, the patient's
description is imprecise, and whether the problem is angina, dyspnea, or both may be difficult to
determine. Because ischemic symptoms require a minute or more to resolve, brief, fleeting sensations
rarely represent angina.
Between and even during attacks of angina, physical findings may be normal. However, during the attack,
heart rate may increase modestly, BP is often elevated, heart sounds become more distant, and the apical
impulse is more diffuse. The 2nd heart sound may become paradoxical because LV ejection is more
prolonged during an ischemic attack. A4th heart sound is common, and a 3rd heart sound may develop. A
mid or late systolic apical murmur shrill—or blowing but not especially loud—may occur if ischemia
causes localized papillary muscle dysfunction, causing mitral regurgitation.
Angina pectoris is typically triggered by exertion or strong emotion, usually persists no more than a few
minutes, and subsides with rest. Response to exertion is usually predictable, but in some patients,
exercise that is tolerated one day may precipitate angina the next because of variations in arterial tone.
Symptoms are exaggerated when exertion follows a meal or occurs in cold weather; walking into the wind
or first contact with cold air after leaving a warm room may precipitate an attack. Symptom severity is
often classified by the degree of exertion resulting in angina (see Table 210-1).
[Table 210-1. Canadian Cardiovascular Classification System of Angina Pectoris]
Attacks may vary from several a day to symptom-free intervals of weeks, months, or years. They may
increase in frequency (called crescendo angina) to a fatal outcome or gradually decrease or disappear if
adequate collateral coronary circulation develops, if the ischemic area infarcts, or if heart failure or
intermittent claudication supervenes and limits activity.
Nocturnal angina may occur if a dream causes striking changes in respiration, pulse rate, and BP.
Nocturnal angina may also be a sign of recurrent LV failure, an equivalent of nocturnal dyspnea. The
recumbent position increases venous return, stretching the myocardium and increasing wall stress, which
increases O2 demand.
Angina may occur spontaneously during rest (called angina decubitus). It is usually accompanied by a
modestly increased heart rate and a sometimes markedly higher BP, which increase O2 demand. These
increases may be the cause of rest angina or the result of ischemia induced by plaque rupture and
thrombus formation. If angina is not relieved, unmet myocardial O2 demand increases further, making MI
more likely.
Unstable angina: Because angina characteristics are usually predictable for a given patient, any
changes (ie, rest angina, new-onset angina, increasing angina) should be considered serious. Such
changes are termed unstable angina and require prompt evaluation and treatment.
Unstable angina is classified based on severity and clinical situation (see
Table 210-2). Also considered are whether unstable angina occurs during treatment for chronic stable
angina and whether transient changes in ST-T waves occur during angina. If angina has occurred within
48 h and no contributory extracardiac condition is present, troponin levels may be measured to help
estimate prognosis; troponin-negative indicates a better prognosis than troponin-positive.
